blog: Encrypted Persistent Storage for Peer Pods with the CAA CSI Block Driver (#200)
confidential-containers/confidentialcontainers.org: content/en/blog/2026/encrypted-block-volumes-csi.md

---
date: 2026-08-14
title: "Encrypted Persistent Storage for Peer Pods with the CAA CSI Block Driver"
linkTitle: "Encrypted Block Storage for Peer Pods"
description: >
  A CSI driver for Peer Pods that does LUKS encryption inside the TEE.
  Keys come from KBS after attestation and never hit the host.
author: Mohammed Adnan ([@mohammedadnan21](https://github.com/mohammedadnan21))
---

## Introduction

> Peer Pods put the workload in a dedicated VM, using the Kata remote hypervisor in [cloud-api-adaptor](https://github.com/confidential-containers/cloud-api-adaptor). TEE protects memory, attestation checks the image. CSI is where that used to fall over: Kubernetes still wants to attach a volume to the worker node and mount it there, and the pod isn't on that node.

Reviewer: Maybe describe PodVM since it's extensively used in the text:
```suggestion
Peer Pods put the workload in a dedicated confidential VM, using the Kata remote hypervisor in [cloud-api-adaptor](https://github.com/confidential-containers/cloud-api-adaptor). We call this PodVM. TEE protects memory, attestation checks the image. CSI is where that used to fall over: Kubernetes still wants to attach a volume to the worker node and mount it there, and the pod isn't on that node.
```

{{% /alert %}}

## The Problem

Normal CSI drivers (AWS EBS CSI, Azure Disk CSI) attach a volume to the kubelet node and mount it into the pod. That breaks with Peer Pods because:

1. **The pod isn't on the node.** It's in a separate VM. There's no local block device to mount.
2. **The node is untrusted.** In our threat model, the host OS, cloud operator, and the Kubernetes control plane are all outside the trust boundary. Keys can't live there.
3. **EmptyDir doesn't persist.** We have encrypted ephemeral storage already, but it's gone when the pod dies.

Some people skip CSI and mount object storage from inside the container (S3 Mountpoint, Azure BlobFuse). That uses FUSE, usually needs a privileged container, and it isn't a PVC. It's also object storage, not a block device, which rules out most databases.

So the requirements were:

> - Volumes created through cloud APIs, persist independently of pod lifecycle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Block volumes created through cloud APIs, persist independently of pod lifecycle
```

- Metadata passed into the PodVM without secrets on the host
- Encryption/decryption inside the TEE only

> - Standard PVC semantics, no app changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Standard Kubernetes PVC semantics, no app changes
```

```yaml
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: StorageClass
metadata:
  name: caa-block-azure-encrypted
parameters:
  cloudProvider: azure
  azureSubscriptionId: "<SUBSCRIPTION_ID>"
  azureResourceGroup: "<RESOURCE_GROUP>"
  azureLocation: eastus
  azureDiskSKU: StandardSSD_LRS
  encrypt-type: luks2
  kbs-key-id: default/luks-key/volume-key
provisioner: caa-csi-block.csi.confidentialcontainers.io
reclaimPolicy: Delete
volumeBindingMode: Immediate
```

`kbs-key-id` is the KBS resource path, with no `kbs:///` prefix. The interceptor adds that prefix when it calls [CDH](https://github.com/confidential-containers/guest-components). The host only ever sees this path string, never the passphrase.

### 2. CSI Driver Creates a Raw Cloud Volume

The controller calls the cloud provider to create a blank block volume:
- **AWS**: `ec2.CreateVolume`, EBS volume tagged with `caa-csi-volume-id`
- **Azure**: `disksClient.BeginCreateOrUpdate`, Managed Disk in the resource group

At this point it's just raw bytes. No filesystem, no encryption header. That gets done later inside the TEE.

### 3. Node Server Writes Volume Metadata (No Secrets)

> When the pod gets scheduled, kubelet calls `NodePublishVolume`. The CSI driver writes a `mountInfo.json` to the Kata direct-volumes directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the pod gets scheduled, kubelet calls `NodePublishVolume`. The CAA CSI driver writes a `mountInfo.json` to the Kata direct-volumes directory:
```

```json
{
  "volume-type": "directvol",
  "device": "/subscriptions/<SUB>/resourceGroups/<RG>/providers/Microsoft.Compute/disks/csi-vol-pvc-xyz",
  "fstype": "ext4",
  "metadata": {
    "cloud-volume-id": "pvc-xyz",
    "cloud-volume-path": "/subscriptions/<SUB>/resourceGroups/<RG>/providers/Microsoft.Compute/disks/csi-vol-pvc-xyz",
    "cloud-provider": "azure",
    "encrypt-type": "luks2",
    "kbs-key-id": "default/luks-key/volume-key"
  }
}
```

This file stays on the host. No secrets in it — CAA only needs the disk ID, filesystem type, `encrypt-type`, and the KBS path.

### 4. CAA Attaches the Volume to the PodVM

CAA picks up `mountInfo.json` and:
- Builds the `cloud_volumes` pod annotation with disk IDs, LUN assignments, mount points, and encryption params
- Creates the PodVM with the disk attached (Azure: data disk on the VM create API call; AWS: `AttachVolume` after instance start)

### 5. Inside the TEE: Attestation → Key Fetch → Mount

Everything below runs inside the PodVM (TEE-protected):

1. **Device detection.** The interceptor finds the attached block device (`/dev/disk/azure/data/by-lun/<LUN>` on Azure, `/dev/disk/by-id/nvme-Amazon_Elastic_Block_Store_*` on AWS).

> 2. **LUKS header check.** `isLuks()` reads the first 6 bytes for the LUKS magic (`LUKS\xba\xbe`). That decides first mount vs remount. Skip it and you either wipe existing data or fail to set up a new volume.

Reviewer: readers might want to know what header metadata validation is done here and how it ensures it's not tampered

> 3. **CDH SecureMount call.** Connects to CDH via TTRPC at `/run/confidential-containers/cdh.sock`. The interceptor sets:

Reviewer: who runs these and what is the trigger?

{{% /alert %}}

### 6. Cleanup on Pod Deletion

When the pod is deleted:
1. Filesystem is unmounted
2. LUKS mapping is closed (`cryptsetup close caa-vol-0`)
3. PodVM is terminated and the disk is detached
4. The CSI controller can delete the cloud volume per the `reclaimPolicy`

{{% alert color="info" %}}
**Data survives pod restarts.** The LUKS2 header and encrypted data stay on the cloud volume after the PodVM is gone. When a new PodVM comes up for the same PVC, the interceptor sees the existing LUKS header, CDH gets the key, and it opens the volume without formatting. Data is still there.
{{% /alert %}}

## Performance

LUKS2 uses `aes-xts-plain64` with AES-NI hardware acceleration, which every modern cloud instance has. Cloud block storage (EBS, Managed Disks) is network-attached, so the network is usually the bottleneck, not CPU-side encryption. Local NVMe can show more dm-crypt overhead; cloud disks usually don't.

Extra work at pod startup (typical cryptsetup / KBS costs, not measured on this stack):

> - **Attestation**: a few seconds. Longer if VCEK certs aren't cached.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Attestation**: a few seconds. Longer if verification collateral is not cached.
```

The options before this were bad. Application-level encryption is messy and you lose Kubernetes lifecycle management. [Confidential EmptyDir](https://confidentialcontainers.org/docs/features/protected-storage/confidential-emptydir/) is ephemeral only, gone on pod restart. Or you just accept the risk. None of that works when you need databases, checkpoints, or audit logs to survive restarts.

So I built a [CSI driver](https://github.com/confidential-devhub/caa-csi-block-driver) for this. Standard Kubernetes PVCs, backed by real cloud block volumes (EBS, Azure Managed Disks). The volumes get passed into the PodVM through Kata's direct-volume mechanism. And when encryption is enabled, the key comes from [KBS/Trustee](https://github.com/confidential-containers/trustee) only after the PodVM passes remote attestation. The host never sees it.

The LUKS encryption piece got [merged into CAA](https://github.com/confidential-containers/cloud-api-adaptor/pull/3155) recently, so it's part of the main stack now.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```Suggestion

When using the Kata remote hypervisor ( [peer-pods](https://github.com/confidential-containers/cloud-api-adaptor)) approach for confidential containers, you may run into challenges if your workload relies on Kubernetes CSI storage for persistent data. 

Until release v0.21.0, we had the [csi-wrapper](https://github.com/confidential-containers/cloud-api-adaptor/tree/v0.21.0/src/csi-wrapper) approach. More details about csi-wrapper approach are available in this [blog](https://www.redhat.com/en/blog/persistent-volume-support-peer-pods-technical-deep-dive).  However, the csi-wrapper approach had significant [limitations]( https://github.com/confidential-containers/cloud-api-adaptor/issues/1374) and it's been removed from latest releases.

For the last few months, we have been working on a different approach to add CSI storage support for peer pods which overcomes the limitations of the CSI-wrapper approach.

The new approach leverages the Kata direct-volume mechanism and supports volume encryption using Trustee-delivered keys.
```

Author: Pushed an updated intro. It's framed around csi-wrapper (v0.21.0), the limits from #1374, and why we dropped it, then the new driver + Trustee-delivered keys.

Also noted that LUKS from #3155 is on CAA main, not in v0.22.0 — a release install won't do encryption yet.
